# Machine Learning to Predict Browsing Selection of Ungulates in Forest Habitats
Zsófia Katona - Bachelor Project AI, Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam

## Implementation of the Bachelor Project

This collection contains the implementation of three machine learning models applied to the task of predicting ungulates' selective browsing behavior in forest habitats. It comprises the following Notebooks, which should be used in the specified order to replicate the process followed in the project:

1. **Data_preparation.ipynb**
   * Creates the dataset used to construct the ML models based on the raw data files contained in the directory *Forests*.
   * `PLEASE NOTE:` due to confidentiality reasons, the complete raw dataset used in the study cannot be shared publicly. Therefore, the folder *Forests* contains a single sample file representing the type of Excel workbooks in which the data was contained, so that the method of processing these files can be overviewed. The files produced by *Data_preparation.ipynb* using the *complete*, here excluded raw sample, are included in the directory *Data*, so that the notebooks listed below can run without interruption in the pipeline.

2. **Data_inspection.ipynb**
   * Provides insight into the dataset constructed in *Data_preparation.ipynb* (this is the dataset readily included in *Data*).
  
3. **Pilot_ML.ipynb**
   * Conducts a preliminary cross-validation and run of the ML models on the original dataset.
  
4. **Aggregating_dataset.ipynb**
   * Applying the sliding-window approach to the sample and inspecting the resulting dataset.
  
5. **Cross-validation.ipynb**
   * Applying the cross-validation process described in the paper to find the best hyperparameter settings for the models.
  
6. **Testing_ML.ipynb**
    * Applying the testing process described in the paper to evaluate the performance of the models.

8. **Analysing_results.ipynb**
    * Inspecting and analyzing the results obtained during the testing phase.

`PLEASE NOTE:` in order for the Notebooks to run seamlessly, the directory in which they are run should contain the directory *Forests* and *Data*, as well as the following (empty) folders:
* *Tests*, where the output of different tests conducted to check the proper working of the Notebooks are saved.
* *Figures*, where the figures generated by the Notebooks are saved.
* *CV*, where the results of the cross-validation are saved.
* *Data for testing*, where the different (reduced) samples used in the testing phase are saved.
* *Results*, where the results of the testing phase are saved.

## Ungulate browsing prediction pipeline

Besides the implementation of the project contained in the above Notebooks, **Browsing_forecast.ipynb** in the directory *Pipeline* contains the ML pipeline aimed to provide a tool to predict browsing behavior in new habitats. All instructions needed to use the pipeline are included in this Notebook. The authors hope that this simple application will contribute to understanding the complexities of ungulate browsing as well as highlighting the importance of its thoughtful consideration in forest management.
